WCO & Dual screen (#5)
aarongustafson/win-student-devs: docs/30DaysOfPWA/advanced-capabilities/04.md

![Placeholder Banner Only. Replace when final assets ready.](_media/day-04.jpg)

Welcome to day 11 of the [30 Days of PWA](<https://aka.ms/learn-pwa/30Days-blog>) series! Today’s blog post will walk you through the different display modes you can set for your website, and the experimental Window Controls Overlay feature which allows the customization of the title bar of your PWA.

## Display Modes 
There are four different display modes available to choose from and each provides a different browser UI experience that you’ll want to consider when deciding which display mode is right for your progressive web application. 

> You set your preferred display mode via the web app manifest’s display property with one of the following options: `fullscreen`, `standalone`, `minimal-ui`, or `browser`:

Author: ```suggestion
You set your preferred display mode via the web app manifest’s `display` property with one of the following values: "fullscreen," "standalone," "minimal-ui," or "browser":
```

```
{

> “display”: “standalone”

Author: ```suggestion
"display": "standalone"
```

}
```

In the event a browser doesn’t support a display mode, which is possible since they’re not required or support all the display mode options, the display mode will fallback through the following display modes this order: `fullscreen`, `standalone`, `minimal-ui`, and `browser`. 

### Standalone display mode 

> Standalone display mode that makes your PWA look and behave the most like a native application. It opens in a different window from the browser and hides all the browser UI elements like the address bar but keeps standard system UI elements like a back button or a close window button. In this mode, your application can also have its own icon in the application launcher.  If standalone isn’t available, it will fall back to the minimal-ui display mode. Twitter uses `standalone` for their PWA.

Author: ```suggestion
The "standalone" display mode makes your PWA look and behave the most like a native application. It opens in a different window from the browser and hides all the browser UI elements like the address bar. It keeps standard system UI elements like a back button or a close window button. In this mode, your application can also have its own icon in the application launcher.  If standalone isn’t available, it will fall back to the "minimal-ui" display mode. Twitter uses "standalone" for their PWA.
```

![Twitter displayed in its own window on Android](_media/display-standalone.png)

### Fullscreen display mode

> Fullscreen display mode takes up the entirety of the display area available and hides all of the browser UI elements. If fullscreen mode isn’t available, it will fall back to standalone. Here's an example of a game that uses `fullscreen`.

Author: ```suggestion
The "fullscreen" display mode takes up the entirety of the display area available and hides all of the browser UI elements. If "fullscreen" isn’t available, it will fall back to "standalone." Here's an example of a game that uses the "fullscreen" display mode.
```

Do you want to mention that desktop browsers don’t currently support fullscreen, so apps wanting to take over the entirety of a desktop display will need to use the Fullscreen API?

![This PacMan game is a PWA and was built with the fullscreen display mode](_media/display-fullscreen.png)

### Minimal-UI display mode 

> The minimal UI display mode gives your PWA a similar experience to the standalone display mode. It opens in its own window, but the application retains a minimal set of the browser UI, and the UI that is retained varies between browsers. The OneDrive PWA uses the `minimal-ui` display mode.

Author: ```suggestion
The "minimal-ui" display mode gives your PWA a similar experience to the standalone display mode. It opens in its own window, but the application retains a minimal set of browser UI controls. The UI that is retained will vary between browsers. The OneDrive PWA uses the "minimal-ui" display mode.
```

![The OneDrive PWA utilizes the minimal-ui display mode](_media/display-minimal-ui.png) 

### Browser display mode

> The browser display mode retains the browser experience with all the browser UI and your web app will not be installable. It will open in a normal browser window or tab. If Twitter were not using standalone mode, it would display in the browser like a normal tab. 

Author: ```suggestion
The "browser" display mode retains the full browser experience, with all the browser UI users expect. If you use this display mode, browsers will not prompt users to install your web app. And even if it's installed manually, your app will always open in a new browser window or tab. If Twitter were not using "standalone" mode, it would display in the browser like a normal tab.
```

![Twitter in a browser window.](_media/display-desktop.png)

### Targeting different display modes with the `display-mode` media feature

> Depending on the display mode you choose for your PWA there may be elements you want to hide when the web app is open in the browser tab, especially if you’re launching in a mode like standalone or fullscreen that hides the browser UI button. You need to ensure there’s a way for people to go back if there’s no back button. Or maybe you want to modify your site styles slightly to display better when the app is in fullscreen mode. 

Author: ```suggestion
Depending on the display mode you choose for your PWA, there may be elements you want to hide when the web app is open in a browser tab, especially if you’re launching in a mode like "standalone" or "fullscreen" that hides the browser UI. You need to ensure there’s a way for people to go back if there’s no back button. Or maybe you want to modify your site styles slightly to display better when the app is in "fullscreen" mode. 
```

You can do this by targeting certain display modes with the `display-mode` media feature. 

```
.app-button {

    display: none;

}

@media (display-mode: standalone) {

.app-button {

    display: block;

    }

}
```

> In this example, the button with the class .app-button would only be shown when the PWA is in standalone mode. You can go even further to combine media queries to change how things are displayed on smaller screens versus a desktop when a user in standalone mode to tailor the experience.

Author: ```suggestion
In this example, the button with the `class` "app-button" would only be shown when the PWA is in "standalone" mode. You can go even further to combine media queries to change how things are displayed on smaller screens versus a desktop when a user is in "standalone" mode to tailor the experience.
```

## Customizing display options further with Window Controls Overlay 
The previous display modes I mentioned currently only offer customization of the display below the title bar when in standalone mode. Window Controls Overlay is an experimental display option that will allow you to customize the title bar of your PWA with CSS and JavaScript. It provides access to the space next to the controls that minimize, maximize, or close the app’s window. 

> Because this feature is experimental and in development, the way it currently works is subject to change. You can turn this feature on in Chrome and Edge by going to `about://flags` and enabling the `Desktop PWA Window Controls Overlay` flag.

Author: ```suggestion
Because this feature is experimental and in development, the way it currently works is subject to change. You can turn on this feature in Chrome and Edge by going to about://flags and [enabling the "Desktop PWA Window Controls Overlay" flag](about://flags/#enable-desktop-pwas-window-controls-overlay).
```

![A title bar with window controls overlay enabled and a title bar without it](_media/display-spec-wco.png)

*This example from the [specification draft](https://wicg.github.io/window-controls-overlay/) shows how the title bar area becomes available when WCO is enabled.* 

### Using Window Controls Overlay 

> In order to use this feature we need to add “display_override” to our web app manifest file. 

Author: ```suggestion
In order to use this feature we need to add `display_override` to our Web App Manifest. 
```

```
{

> “display_override”: [“window-controls-overlay”]

Author: ```suggestion
"display_override": ["window-controls-overlay"]
```

}
```

The customized title bar will only show when in a separate PWA window on a desktop operating system. After our `display_override`, we would then follow up with our preferred display mode when window controls overlay isn’t available. 

```
{

> “display_override”: [“window-controls-overlay”],

Author: ```suggestion
"display_override": ["window-controls-overlay"],
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> “display”: “standalone”,

Author: ```suggestion
"display": "standalone",
```

}
```

> Now that we’ve stated via the manifest we would like to use window controls overlay, we need to add some CSS to position the content in our title bar area. We can do that with the following CSS environment variables: 

Author: ```suggestion
Now that we’ve stated via the manifest we would like to use window controls overlay, we need to add some CSS to position the content in our title bar area. We can do that with the following [CSS environment variables](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/env()): 
```

- **`titlebar-area-x`**
- **`titlebar-area-y`**
- **`titlebar-area-width`**
- **`titlebar-area-height`**

Using these environment variables would look something like this: 

```
.titleBar {
    position: fixed;
    left: env(titlebar-area-x, 0);
    top: env(titlebar-area-y, 0);
    width: env(titlebar-area-width, 100%);
    height: env(titlebar-area-height, 40px);
}
```

The `titlebar-area-x` variable gives us the distance from the left of the viewport to where the titlebar appears, with a fallback integer. The `titlebar-area-y` variable gives us the distance from the top. And titlebar-area-width and titlebar-area-height set the width and height respectively, with fallback values. 

### Keeping the title bar draggable
Once you’ve positioned and styled your title bar, there’s one more step left. The window is no longer draggable if you’ve turned on window control overlay, so we need to fix this with the `app-region` CSS property. 

```
.titleBar {
    position: fixed;
    left: env(titlebar-area-x, 0);
    top: env(titlebar-area-y, 0);
    width: env(titlebar-area-width, 100%);
    height: env(titlebar-area-height, 40px);
    -webkit-app-region: drag;
    app-region: drag;
}
```

> This CSS property is also experimental and not standardized so -webkit-app-region is needed for it to work in the browser, and with this prefix it only works in Chromium based browsers. 

Author: ```suggestion
This CSS property is also experimental, so `-webkit-app-region` is needed for it to work and is only supported in Chromium-based browsers. 
```

## Resources 
[MDN `display-mode`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/display-mode)
[App Design: Display Modes](https://web.dev/learn/pwa/app-design/#display-modes)
[WCO: Breaking Out of the Box](https://alistapart.com/article/breaking-out-of-the-box/)

## Summary

> Display modes are an easy way to make your PWA feel like a native app and are set via the web app manifest ‘display’ property. The ability to further customize the title bar area for an even greater native app feel when your PWA is displayed in a separate window is available via the experimental window control overlay setting available in Chrome and Edge. 

Author: ```suggestion
Display modes are an easy way to make your PWA feel like a native app and are set via the web app manifest `display` property. The ability to further customize the title bar area for an even greater native app feel when your PWA is displayed in a separate window is available via the experimental window control overlay setting available in Chrome and Edge. 
```
